ADDREV-14 - Updated Consent Experience related best practices in light of policy update 15/02/24 (#1806)
mozilla/extension-workshop: src/content/documentation/develop/best-practices-for-collecting-user-data-consents.md

1. Does my extension collect technical or interaction data? If so, offer the user the opportunity to opt-out of this data collection, although you can always offer opt-in consent if you prefer.
2. Does my extension collect personally identifying information? If so, get the user’s opt-in consent before collecting any of this data. Remember that personally identifying information includes technical or interaction data tagged with the user’s identity or information that can be used to identify the user, such as an URL.

> 3. Does my extension exchange data with native applications using [NativeMessaging](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/Native_messaging)? If so, then the data exchanged needs to be declared in the data collection consent.

Reviewer: This seems a bit out of place here since this section is about whether an add-on collects different kinds of data, but now how.

If you are unsure if your add-on collects personal data, technical data, or interaction data, check out the definition in [Data Disclosure, Collection and Management](/documentation/publish/add-on-policies/#data-disclosure-collection-and-management). 

> It is important to note that “data” includes all information the add-on collects, regardless of the manner of collection. These include, but aren't limited to, data collection leading from user action (clicks, form submissions, logging in), statistical data about add-on usage, error logging within the add-on etc. 

Reviewer: Since this is supposed to address the case when add-ons are collecting data as part of the primary function, should this be mentioned here? This rather seems to give examples what technical data collection entails, which is a different topic

1. Does my extension collect technical or interaction data? If so, offer the user the opportunity to opt-out of this data collection, although you can always offer opt-in consent if you prefer.
2. Does my extension collect personally identifying information? If so, get the user’s opt-in consent before collecting any of this data. Remember that personally identifying information includes technical or interaction data tagged with the user’s identity or information that can be used to identify the user, such as an URL.

> If you are unsure whether your add-on collects personal, technical, or interaction data, check out the definition in [Data Disclosure, Collection and Management](/documentation/publish/add-on-policies/#data-disclosure-collection-and-management). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are unsure whether your add-on collects personal, technical, or interaction data, refer to the definition in [Data Disclosure, Collection and Management](/documentation/publish/add-on-policies/#data-disclosure-collection-and-management). 
```

> It is important to note that “data” includes all information the add-on collects, regardless of the manner of collection or the reason for collection. This also includes data collected as part of the add-on's primary functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is important to note that “data” includes all information the extension collects, regardless of the manner of collection or the reason for collection. This also includes data collected as part of the extension’s  primary functionality.
```

> It is important to note that “data” includes all information the extension collects, regardless of the manner of collection or the reason for collection. This also includes data collected as part of the extension’s  primary functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Data” includes all information the extension collects, regardless of the manner of collection or the reason for collection. This also includes data collected as part of the extension’s  primary functionality.
```

## Prompt after install

As part of your extension’s onboarding flow, include information about your privacy policy and data collection, and seek any necessary user consents. Any privacy information and settings should be clear and unmissable, separating these details from general information about your extension can help. We recommend using a new tab in the currently focussed window.

For more information on how to implement a post-install page or dialog, see [Best practices for onboarding, upboarding, and offboarding users](/documentation/develop/onboard-upboard-offboard-users/).

As mentioned in the [Add-on policies](/documentation/publish/add-on-policies/), if your extension collects user data in association with features that run in the background, such as ad blocking, you need to make sure the data collection is not activated until you have obtained user consent.

> It is worth noting that if an update to your add-on adds data collection, updating users must be consented to the newly collected data. The same holds true if your add-on didn't collect any data in the past, but does so in a new update.

Reviewer: That's not entirely accurate, for example users don't need to consent to newly collected technical data.

Author: That's a good point!

We have talked about how you could let users opt-out of collecting technical and interaction data but must have users opt-in to collecting personally identifying information. Before you design your extension features around your consent requests, it is important to understand how these options affect your design.

Where you provide the user with an opt-in option, the related feature **must be turned off by default** and only turned on once the user has actively agreed to use that feature.

Where you provide the user with an opt-out option, the related features **can be turned on by default** but **must be turned off if the user indicates** they want to opt-out.

> If the main functionality of your add-on doesn't work without collecting user data, please provide an option within the data collection consent to uninstall the add-on. [`management.uninstallSelf()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/management/uninstallSelf) API can be used to uninstall your add-on programmatically. Please label the buttons accordingly. We recommend "Uninstall (name of add-on)" or "Remove (name of add-on)".

Reviewer: Avoid "please", I don't think we're using it in the textual guidelines here.

> If the main functionality of your add-on doesn't work without collecting user data, please provide an option within the data collection consent to uninstall the add-on. [`management.uninstallSelf()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/management/uninstallSelf) API can be used to uninstall your add-on programmatically. Please label the buttons accordingly. We recommend "Uninstall (name of add-on)" or "Remove (name of add-on)".

Reviewer: Should be button label be something like "Decline an uninstall"?

## Prompt after install

> As part of your extension’s onboarding flow, include information about your privacy policy and data collection and seek any necessary user consent. Any privacy information and settings should be clear and unmissable. Separating these details from general information about your extension can help. Using a new tab in the focused window is a good way of doing this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of your extension’s onboarding flow, include information about your privacy policy and data collection and seek any necessary user consent. Any privacy information and settings should be clear and unmissable. Separating these details from general information about your extension can help. Using a new tab in the focused window is recommended.
```

For more information on how to implement a post-install page or dialog, see [Best practices for onboarding, upboarding, and offboarding users](/documentation/develop/onboard-upboard-offboard-users/).

As mentioned in the [Add-on policies](/documentation/publish/add-on-policies/), if your extension collects user data in association with features that run in the background, such as ad blocking, you need to make sure the data collection is not activated until you have obtained user consent.

> It is worth noting that if an update to your add-on collects new personally identifying information, updating users must be consented to the newly collected data (opt-in).

Author: Should we add "existing users must consent..." here, to emphasis this is referring to users who already have the add-on installed and are updating to a new version?

> It is worth noting that if an update to your add-on collects new personally identifying information, updating users must be consented to the newly collected data (opt-in).

Author: (committed your suggestion with "existing users must consent...". Please feel free to suggest improvements)

<!-- END: Single Column Body Module -->

{% capture content %}

## Data classification

> It is important to classify data into its right category and set defaults accordingly. AMO policies require an opt-in data collection consent for personally identifiable data and opt-out for technical and user interaction data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to classify data into its right category and set defaults accordingly. Mozilla's add-on policies require an opt-in data collection consent for personally identifiable data and opt-out for technical and user interaction data. 
```

> It is important to classify data into its right category and set defaults accordingly. AMO policies require an opt-in data collection consent for personally identifiable data, and opt-out for technical and user interaction data. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is important to classify data into its right category and set defaults accordingly. AMO policies require an opt-in data collection consent for personally identifiable data and opt-out for technical and user interaction data. 
```

## Your consent dialogs

> Once you understand your privacy consent flow, you can add a suitable consent dialog. The following are suggestions on how to present a data collection consent dialog. We recommend that all of the data collection controls and actions (that is, toggles and confirmation buttons) be present within the same view. Where the mockups include the linked text “our Privacy Policy”, this should go to your extension’s privacy policy page on AMO. If you choose to follow these mockups, remember to modify them appropriately for your extension.

Reviewer: Do the mockups and flow diagrams respect this recommendation?

Author: I'd say they're slightly off from our recommendation here, especially the last image which has a "revisit data collection consent" button, implying multiple views. 

Do you know how the original images were created, or if we're stuck to a particular style? We should update the images to be in line with our recommendations, even if they're just recommendations (I hadn't originally planned on changing images, but it makes sense to do it together).

Reviewer: Unfortunately I don't know. I agree, ideally we should update the diagrams when they are not accurate.

Reviewer: @rebloor can you provide us with the original source files for the images, so we can update them? Can you add them to https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Y_Ap1kbMaQCsMI2E_pbJ-b46zvu0Re3o?

Reviewer 2: > @rebloor can you provide us with the original source files for the images, so we can update them?
Sorry, I missed this request. Unfortunately, I'm not aware of the whereabouts of these files and couldn't find a copy. However, I see that the mock ups have now being re-created.

Reviewer 2: @wagnerand @abhn I've added a copy of the flow diagram to the shared GDrive - it should be the latest.

## Your consent dialogs

> Once you understand your privacy consent flow, you can add a suitable consent dialog. The following are suggestions on how to present a data collection consent dialog. We recommend that all of the data collection controls and actions (toggles and confirmation buttons) be present within the same view. Note that a summary of the data collected and how it is used must be present for each type of data collected within the consent dialog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you understand your privacy consent flow, you can add a suitable consent dialog. The following are suggestions on how to present a data collection consent dialog. We recommend that all of the data collection controls and actions (toggles and confirmation buttons) be present within the same view. A summary of the data collected and how it is used must be present for each type of data collected within the consent dialog.
```

### Only personally identifying information
The default option is not to collect personally identifying information. If you do, the user needs to actively opt-in. Remember to list the data you’re collecting; don’t make the user read your privacy policy to determine what data you are collecting and why.

  ![Mockup of a prompt that could be used when an extension requires consent for processing personal data only.](/assets/img/documentation/develop/consent-personal.jpg)
### Only technical or interaction data
Data collected does not include user identifiers. The option to collect technical data can be set as the default response.

  ![Mockup of a prompt that could be used when an extension requires consent for processing technical data only.](/assets/img/documentation/develop/consent-anon.jpg)
### Combination: Personal and technical data.
The add-on is requesting both types of data collection. Please ensure the choices are separate.

  ![Mockup of a prompt that could be used when extension requires consent for processing personal and technical data.](/assets/img/documentation/develop/consent-mixed.jpg)

> ### Required data collection

Reviewer 2: @wagnerand @abhn If we now recommending the use of a single screen, then doesn't this section need to be rolled into the previous ones? That is, each consent screen could have up to three buttons:

- consent to data collection (and use all of the extensions functions)
- decline data collection, and use the reduced functionality of the extension
- decline data collection and remove the extension (this could either be because it won't work without data collection or simply to allow the user to uninstall it because the reduced functionality is no longer of interest to them)

Author: @rebloor if I understood what you're suggesting

```
 -   decline data collection, and use the reduced functionality of the extension
 -   decline data collection and remove the extension (this could either be because it won't work without data collection or simply to allow the user to uninstall it because the reduced functionality is no longer of interest to them)
```

These two will be in an either-or configuration, essentially either the developer allows for usage with reduced functionality, or prompts user to uninstall extension as the primary functionality of the add-on doesn't work without the said data collection. 

I don't see the two buttons being used together, but please feel free to correct me here if you think it is a possible scenario.

Reviewer 2: @abhn We have two cases:
- the app doesn't work without collection data, the user's options are:
  - yes, you can collect data in accordance with your privacy policy (and I will use the app)
  - no, you can't collect data and, as the app won't work without data collection, please delete it for me
- the app works with limited functionality without data collection, user's options are:
  - yes, you can collect data in accordance with your privacy policy (and I will use the app and have all features available)
  - no, you can't collect data and I will use the reduced functionality of the app
  - no, you can't collect data and the reduced functionality of the app is of no use to me; please delete it for me.

Any clearer?

Author: @rebloor 

I'm a bit unsure about your suggestion as the consent best practices page is documenting best practices from a developer's perspective and what you're suggesting seems to me like a decision on the user's part. 

Specifically, we let the developer decide if their extension is functional without the said data collection. If it is, they can allow reduced functionality. If not, they'd uninstall the extension on consent decline.

Providing a button that allows the user to keep the extension when the add-on would probably not do anything without said data collection wouldn't make sense, and the developer would be the best judge of that.

```
> no, you can't collect data and I will use the reduced functionality of the app
> no, you can't collect data and the reduced functionality of the app is of no use to me; please delete it for me.
```

Here, the developer decides whether they'd like to keep their add-on usable despite of consent rejection, or if they think it doesn't make sense and uninstall. So either-or between those options.

At least that's how I interpret the following policy statement, derived from which is this choice. 

```
If the main functionality of the add-on does not work without collecting personal data, the add-on must provide a choice for the user to either accept the data collection or uninstall the add-on.
```

Reviewer 2: @abhn I'll leave it there, if you're happy, as I wasn't involved in the policy development. However the statement

> If the main functionality of the add-on does not work without collecting personal data, the add-on must provide a choice for the user to either accept the data collection or uninstall the add-on.

seems somewhat arbitrary in saying that the developer can't offer the non-main functionality that may work without collecting data to a user who doesn't want their data to be collected. (I also have to wonder who determines what constitutes the main functionality.)

I would suggest it should be

> If the add-on does not work without collecting personal data, the add-on must provide a choice for the user to either accept the data collection or uninstall the add-on.

Otherwise the developer and/or user should surely be able to choose if they want a reduced functionality extension?

Author: Following our discussion from earlier today, we'll defer the discussion of letting the user decide whether they want to keep the extension with reduced functionality or uninstall it (instead of having the developer decide and reviewers verify the main functionality aspect) to a later time when we're updating the policy itself.

Since we're only updating the best practices documentation here based off of the existing policies, I'll resolve this conversation. Thank you for the feedback in any case. @rebloor

## Your consent dialogs

> Once you understand your privacy consent flow, you can add a suitable consent dialog. The following are suggestions on how to present a data collection consent dialog. We recommend that all of the data collection controls and actions (that is, toggles and confirmation buttons) be present within the same view. Note that a summary of the data collected and how it is used must be present for each type of data collected within the consent dialog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you understand your privacy consent flow, you can add a suitable consent dialog. The following are suggestions on how to present a data collection consent dialog. We recommend that all of the data collection controls and actions (toggles and confirmation buttons) be present within the same view. Note that a summary of the data collected and how it is used must be present for each type of data collected within the consent dialog.
```
